Add support for new pattern kinds (#873)
dotnet/csharpstandard: standard/expressions.md

>
> |  **Subclause**      | **Category**                     | **Operators**                                          |
> |  -----------------  | -------------------------------  | -------------------------------------------------------|
> |  [§12.8](expressions.md#128-primary-expressions)              | Primary                          | `x.y` `x?.y` `f(x)` `a[x]` `a?[x]` `x++` `x--` `new` `typeof` `default` `checked` `unchecked` `delegate` `stackalloc`  |
> |  [§12.9](expressions.md#129-unary-operators)              | Unary                            | `+` `-` `!` `~` `++x` `--x` `(T)x` `await x` |

> > |  §switch-expression-new-clause                                   | Switch                           | `switch { … }` |

Reviewer: Two part change (blame github).

I believe Switch should be *between* Range & Multiplicative

```suggestion
```

next changes adds it back in…

> |  [§12.10](expressions.md#1210-range-operator) | Range | `..` |

> > |  [§12.11](expressions.md#1210-arithmetic-operators)              | Multiplicative                   | `*` `/` `%` |

Reviewer 2: probably a merge issue:

```suggestion
> |  [§12.11](expressions.md#1211-arithmetic-operators)              | Multiplicative                   | `*` `/` `%` |
```

Reviewer: Combining @BillWagner’s change & my part 2 (part 1 on line 152):

```suggestion
> |  §switch-expression-new-clause                                   | Switch                           | `switch { … }` |
> |  [§12.11](expressions.md#1211-arithmetic-operators)              | Multiplicative                   | `*` `/` `%` |
```

>
> |  **Subclause**      | **Category**                     | **Operators**                                          |
> |  -----------------  | -------------------------------  | -------------------------------------------------------|
> |  [§12.8](expressions.md#128-primary-expressions)              | Primary                          | `x.y` `x?.y` `f(x)` `a[x]` `a?[x]` `x++` `x--` `new` `typeof` `default` `checked` `unchecked` `delegate` `stackalloc`  |

> > |  [§12.9](expressions.md#129-unary-operators)              | Unary                            | `+` `-` `!` `~` `++x` `--x` `(T)x` `await x` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> |  [§12.8](expressions.md#128-primary-expressions)              | Primary                          | `x.y` `x?.y` `f(x)` `a[x]` `a?[x]` `x++` `x--` `x!` `new` `typeof` `default` `checked` `unchecked` `delegate` `stackalloc`  |
> |  [§12.9](expressions.md#129-unary-operators)              | Unary                            | `+` `-` `!` `~` `^` `++x` `--x` `(T)x` `await x` |
```

> |  [§12.15](expressions.md#1215-conditional-logical-operators)             | Conditional OR                   | `\|\|`  |
> |  [§12.16](expressions.md#1216-the-null-coalescing-operator) and [§12.17](expressions.md#1217-the-throw-expression-operator)             | Null coalescing and throw expression                  | `??`  `throw x`  |
> |  [§12.19](expressions.md#1219-conditional-operator)             | Conditional                      | `?:`   |

> > |  [§12.22](expressions.md#1222-assignment-operators) and [§12.20](expressions.md#1220-anonymous-function-expressions)  | Assignment and lambda expression | `=` `= ref` `*=` `/=` `%=` `+=` `-=` `<<=` `>>=` `&=` `^=` `\|=` `=>`   |

Reviewer 2: I think this was dropped by mistake in the merge:

```suggestion
> |  [§12.22](expressions.md#1222-assignment-operators) and [§12.20](expressions.md#1220-anonymous-function-expressions)  | Assignment and lambda expression | `=` `= ref` `*=` `/=` `%=` `+=` `-=` `<<=` `>>=` `&=` `^=` `\|=` `=>`   `??=` |
```

> > |  [§12.22](expressions.md#1222-assignment-operators) and [§12.20](expressions.md#1220-anonymous-function-expressions)  | Assignment and lambda expression | `=` `= ref` `*=` `/=` `%=` `+=` `-=` `<<=` `>>=` `&=` `^=` `\|=` `=>`   `??=` |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> |  [§12.22](expressions.md#1222-assignment-operators) and [§12.20](expressions.md#1220-anonymous-function-expressions)  | Assignment and lambda expression | `=` `= ref` `*=` `/=` `%=` `+=` `-=` `<<=` `>>=` `&=` `^=` `\|=` `=>`  `??=` |
```

An awaiter’s implementation of the interface methods `INotifyCompletion.OnCompleted` and `ICriticalNotifyCompletion.UnsafeOnCompleted` should cause the delegate `r` to be invoked at most once. Otherwise, the behavior of the enclosing async function is undefined.

## §switch-expression-new-clause Switch expression

A *switch_expression* provides `switch`-like semantics in an expression context.

```ANTLR
switch_expression

>     : range_expression 'switch' '{' (switch_expression_arms ','?)? '}'

Reviewer: Something has gone wrong here:

1. *range_expression* does not appear to be defined anywhere
2. it appears the intention is to slot *switch_expression* between *multiplicative_expression* & *unary_expression* in the expression hierarchy, if this is the case then *switch_expression* needs to include *unary_expression* so as not to break the grammar layering

Author: *range_expression* is defined by the V8 PR #605, "Add Support for Indexers and Ranges," which has not yet been merged.

Reviewer: Thanks @RexJaeschke. From #605 we have:

> ```ANTLR
> range_expression
>     : unary_expression
>     | range_expression? '..' range_expression?
>     ;
> ```

This does connect to *unary_expression* but the grammar is still broken. The *switch_expression* grammar allows for empty braces,`switch { }`, which doesn’t seem right, was the intended grammar:

```ANTLR
switch_expression
    : range_expression ( 'switch' '{' switch_expression_arms ','? '}' )?
    ;
```

I haven't checked that all fits (see next para) but it makes a bit more logical sense and should at least fix the layering issue.

Also how is `e switch { ... } switch { ... }` to be handled, if at all? I.e. using one switch to provide the value to switch on for a second (third, …) one? Something like:

```ANTLR
switch_expression
    : range_expression
    | switch_expression ( 'switch' '{' switch_expression_arms ','? '}' )?
    ;
```

might be wanted, but that is left-recursive… Requiring parentheses (`(e switch { ... }) switch { ... }` is another option.

Reviewer: Fix to my own comment of Oct 30, 2023: It doesn’t matter if the rule is left recursive *per se*. While we avoid it when not required, left/right recursion is the way left/right associativity is represented.

So the question here is how should `switch { … } switch { … } switch { … }` associate, if it is supported?

Probably right associative surely?

Once supported/associtivity is decided the grammar will follow… (famous last words ;-))

(I haven’t checked what any implementation does)

Reviewer 3: Since the switch expression has only one value operand, there is no associativity issue. There is only one way it could possibly associate. According to the compiler, the following precedence levels are from looser to tighter:
```
            Multiplicative,
            Switch,
            Range,
            Unary,
```

A switch expression may indeed have a switch expression as its left operand.

Reviewer 3: Syntactically, a switch expression's block may be empty. Because of the target-typing rule, there are legal programs that contain no switch expression arms, such as this statement: `int x = 1 switch {};` (which will always throw an exception and produces a warning that "The switch expression does not handle all possible values of its input type (it is not exhaustive). For example, the pattern '_' is not covered.").

However, without a target type it is expected to be a semantic error, because there is no common type among the switch arms.

The (left) operand to a switch expression may be a switch expression:

```antlr
switch_expression
    : range_expression
    | switch_expression 'switch' '{' ( switch_expression_arms ','? )? '}'
    ;
```

I suppose we ought to reorganize this to avoid left recursion:

```antlr
switch_expression
    | range_expression ( 'switch' '{' ( switch_expression_arms ','? )? '}' )*
    ;
```

There is no issue of precedence of a switch expression because it has no right-hand expression operand. There is only one possible way to interpret `a switch { b => c } switch { d => e }`.

Reviewer: @gafter – There is no need to remove self left-recursion in this sort of case, it occurs a lot in the grammar – stick with the first grammar which follows the pattern of many rules in the expression stack.

I must admit I’ve just jumped into this but “there are legal programs that contain no switch expression arms” followed an example that always throws an exception is, lets say, curious. Is there a no-arm example which doesn’t always throw? (Would not a better warning include that fact that it will throw?)

Whatever the answer the semantics need to be clearly defined in the Standard, and this comment suggests to me they are not.

Reviewer 3: A switch expression with no arms always throws.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

An awaiter’s implementation of the interface methods `INotifyCompletion.OnCompleted` and `ICriticalNotifyCompletion.UnsafeOnCompleted` should cause the delegate `r` to be invoked at most once. Otherwise, the behavior of the enclosing async function is undefined.

## §switch-expression-new-clause Switch expression

A *switch_expression* provides `switch`-like semantics in an expression context.

> ```ANTLR
> switch_expression
>     : range_expression 'switch' '{' (switch_expression_arms ','?)? '}'
>     ;

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
switch_expression
    : switch_expression 'switch' '{' (switch_expression_arms ','?)? '}'
    | range_expression
    ;
```

Reviewer: @gafter above changed the order of the alternatives but also allowed there to be no arms as per the original, however that is invalid as the switch must cover all possible values – that gives us:

```suggestion
switch_expression
    : switch_expression 'switch' '{' switch_expression_arms ','? '}'
    | range_expression
    ;
```

Reviewer 3: No. When there is a target type it is possible for there to be no switch expression arms.
https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgAgzABFATHAwnA3gWAFBzwxZLXfUgSwDsAXOADzgF44BGOAZwHcyqBjACwwBfANw5SgnIKA==

switch_expression_arms
    : switch_expression_arm
    | switch_expression_arms ',' switch_expression_arm
    ;
switch_expression_arm
    : pattern case_guard? '=>' expression
    ;
```

> A *switch_expression* may not be used as an *expression_statement*.

Reviewer 4: As always, I find "may not" to be somewhat ambiguous. Could we use "shall not" here?

Reviewer 3: Perhaps better: "is not", since it is simply not in the yield of the grammar of *expression_statement*.

> The type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.15](expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the expressions appearing to the right of the `=>` tokens of the *switch_expression_arm*s if such a type exists and the expression in every arm of the switch expression can be implicitly converted (§switch-expression-conversion) to that type.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.15](expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the expressions appearing to the right of the `=>` tokens of the *switch_expression_arm*s. It is an error if no such type exists. The expression in every arm of the switch expression is implicitly converted (§switch-expression-conversion) to that type.
```

Reviewer: I think the “expressions appearing to the right of the `=>` tokens of the *switch_expression_arm*s” of the original might be a case for introducing an extra rule to the grammar so simply the language. First replace the *switch_expression_arm* rule (lines 3573-5) with:

```
switch_expression_arm
    : pattern case_guard? '=>' switch_expression_arm_expression
    ;
    
switch_expression_arm_expression
    : expression
    ;
```

And then modify @gafter’s suggestion to match:

```suggestion
The type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.15](expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the *switch_expression_arm_expression*s. It is an error if no such type exists. The expression in every arm of the switch expression is implicitly converted (§switch-expression-conversion) to that type.
```

Reviewer 4: Do we actually need it to be an error for there to be no best common type? I'd only expect that to be a problem if we need the switch expression to *have* a type, e.g. for assignment to `var`. If we're just trying to convert the switch expression to a known type, it should be fine. 

Example:

```csharp
var now = DateTime.UtcNow;
// Valid: every arm is implicitly convertible to string?
string? x = now.Month switch { _ => null };
// Invalid: no best type
var y = now.Month switch { _ => null };
```

Reviewer 3: This specification does not describe target-typed switch expressions. See
https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/2389
https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/blob/main/proposals/csharp-8.0/patterns.md

The type of the switch_expression is the best common type ([§12.6.3.15](https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/blob/draft-v8/standard/expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the expressions appearing to the right of the => tokens of the switch_expression_arms if such a type exists and the expression in every arm of the switch expression can be implicitly converted to that type. In addition, we add a new switch expression conversion, which is a predefined implicit conversion from a switch expression to every type T for which there exists an implicit conversion from each arm's expression to T.

We have to be careful defining when the common type must exist (when there is no target type) and when it doesn't (the switch is target-typed). The spec must say that when there is no target type, it is an error if there is no common type.

Reviewer: Added previous comment to #1432

It is an error if some *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern cannot affect the result because some previous pattern and guard will always match.

> A switch expression is said to be *exhaustive* if some arm of the switch expression handles every value of its input.  The compiler shall produce a warning if a switch expression is not exhaustive.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A switch expression is said to be *exhaustive* if every value of its input is handled by at least one arm of the switch expression.  The compiler shall produce a warning if a switch expression is not exhaustive.
```

Or something like that - currently I read the proposal as "if there's some arm X such that X handles every value".

Reviewer 2: I like Jon's rewording.

> At runtime, the result of the *switch_expression* is the value of the *expression* of the first *switch_expression_arm* for which the expression on the left-hand-side of the *switch_expression* matches the *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern, and for which the *case_guard* of the *switch_expression_arm*, if present, evaluates to `true`. If there is no such *switch_expression_arm*, the *switch_expression* throws an instance of the exception `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.SwitchExpressionException`.

Reviewer 4: Possibly reinforce that this last part can only happen if the switch expression is not exhaustive? (Or if there's a compiler bug that makes it *think* it's exhaustive when it isn't really...)

Reviewer 2: I don't know if it's necessary, except as a *Note*. The compiler emits a warning for a non-exhaustive switch expression, so it's a valid program for a non-exhaustive switch expression.

Reviewer 3: No. It turns out it can happen due to nulls too.

https://sharplab.io/#v2:CYLg1APgxAdgrgGwQQwEYIKYAJgEsDOamAsAFAACAzFuQExYDCWA3mVuzdeQIwBsNAFiwBZZLhgAKcQBcA/FgAeAShZsO6mVgCeWALyKs+AO65pAYwAWLLJoBeegHxZ6AXwDca9i7IugA===

```ANTLR
multiplicative_expression
    : switch_expression
    | multiplicative_expression '*' switch_expression
    | multiplicative_expression '/' switch_expression

>     | multiplicative_expression '%' switch_expression

Reviewer: Something has gone wrong here, see comment on line 3565 above

Reviewer: This should be resolved if suggestions above are adopted.

Reviewer: Suggestions above were adopted, this is resolved.

A *switch_expression* provides `switch`-like semantics in an expression context.

```ANTLR
switch_expression
    : range_expression 'switch' '{' (switch_expression_arms ','?)? '}'
    ;
switch_expression_arms
    : switch_expression_arm
    | switch_expression_arms ',' switch_expression_arm
    ;
switch_expression_arm
    : pattern case_guard? '=>' expression
    ;
```

A *switch_expression* may not be used as an *expression_statement*.
The type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.15](expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the expressions appearing to the right of the `=>` tokens of the *switch_expression_arm*s if such a type exists and the expression in every arm of the switch expression can be implicitly converted (§switch-expression-conversion) to that type.
It is an error if some *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern cannot affect the result because some previous pattern and guard will always match.
A switch expression is said to be *exhaustive* if some arm of the switch expression handles every value of its input.  The compiler shall produce a warning if a switch expression is not exhaustive.

> At runtime, the result of the *switch_expression* is the value of the *expression* of the first *switch_expression_arm* for which the expression on the left-hand-side of the *switch_expression* matches the *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern, and for which the *case_guard* of the *switch_expression_arm*, if present, evaluates to `true`. If there is no such *switch_expression_arm*, the *switch_expression* throws an instance of the exception `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.SwitchExpressionException`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At runtime, the result of the *switch_expression* is the value of the *expression* of the first *switch_expression_arm* for which the expression on the left-hand-side of the *switch_expression* matches the *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern, and for which the *case_guard* of the *switch_expression_arm*, if present, evaluates to `true`. If there is no such *switch_expression_arm*, the *switch_expression* throws an instance of the exception `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.SwitchExpressionException` if this type is defined in the compilation or references at compile time, or an instance of `System.InvalidOperationException` otherwise.
```

Reviewer: This change does not seem right for the Standard, is it not adding an exception which a particular compiler uses when using an older version of its runtime? As such it is down to the implementation to document how it behaves in such a situation, while C# v8 specifies `SwitchExpressionException`. Or am I missing something?

Reviewer 3: I'm not going to take the suggested change.

The range operator is non-associative ([§12.4.2](expressions.md#1242-operator-precedence-and-associativity)).

## §switch-expression-new-clause Switch expression

A *switch_expression* provides `switch`-like semantics in an expression context.

> 
> ```ANTLR
> switch_expression
>     : range_expression
>     | switch_expression 'switch' '{' (switch_expression_arms ','?)? '}'
>     ;
> switch_expression_arms
>     : switch_expression_arm
>     | switch_expression_arms ',' switch_expression_arm
>     ;
> switch_expression_arm
>     : pattern case_guard? '=>' switch_expression_arm_expression
>     ;
> switch_expression_arm_expression
>     : expression
>     ;

Reviewer: Simplify/flatten grammar, add space between rules:

```suggestion
switch_expression
    : range_expression
    | switch_expression 'switch' '{' switch_expression_arms? '}'
    ;

switch_expression_arms
    : switch_expression_arm (',' switch_expression_arm)* ','?
    ;

switch_expression_arm
    : pattern case_guard? '=>' switch_expression_arm_expression
    ;

switch_expression_arm_expression
    : expression
    ;
```

```

> A *switch_expression* is not an *expression_statement*.

Reviewer: The valid *statement_expression* kinds are given in §13.7; *switch_expression*, and plenty of other expressions, are not listed there and the corresponding descriptions don't include the same negative assertion.

Is there some reason to include this here, or can it be deleted?

Possible deletion:

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 4: Agreed in the meeting to do this (deletion).

> There is a *switch expression conversion* (§switch-expression-conversion) from a switch expression to a type `T`

Reviewer 4: This is a direct restatement of the clause in conversions.md. Might we skip this paragraph and just link to the clause from line 3905?

Reviewer 4: Agreed in the meeting to do this.

if there is an implicit conversion from every *switch_expression_arm_expression* of each of the switch expression's *switch_expression_arm*s to `T`.

If a switch expression is not subject to a *switch expression conversion*, then

> - The type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.15](expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the *switch_expression_arm_expression*s of the *switch_expression_arm*s if such a type exists and each *switch_expression_arm_expression* can be implicitly converted to that type.

Reviewer: Fix xref & add commas:

```suggestion
- The type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.16](expressions.md#126316-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the *switch_expression_arm_expression*s of the *switch_expression_arm*s, if such a type exists, and each *switch_expression_arm_expression* can be implicitly converted to that type.
```

> - The type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.15](expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the *switch_expression_arm_expression*s of the *switch_expression_arm*s if such a type exists and each *switch_expression_arm_expression* can be implicitly converted to that type.

Reviewer 4: I'd be tempted to remove the list-ness of this. Just:

> If a switch expression is not subject to a *switch expression conversion*, then the type of the *switch_expression* is the best common type [§12.6.3.15](expressions.md#126315-finding-the-best-common-type-of-a-set-of-expressions)) of the *switch_expression_arm_expression*s of the *switch_expression_arm*s if such a type exists and each *switch_expression_arm_expression* can be implicitly converted to that type. It is an error if no such type exists.

(Quite possibly with commas and different targets, as per Nigel's change above.)

Reviewer 2: In other language elements, we describe this as an expression that doesn't have a type, but can be converted to a type. Would it be more consistent for a switch expression to not have a type, but be convertible to any common type of the switch_expression_arm_expression types?

Reviewer 3: No, because it may have a type, just like `1` has a type but also can be converted to `byte`.

- It is an error if no such type exists.

> It is an error if some *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern cannot affect the result because some previous pattern and guard will always match.

Reviewer: Is it not that some previous arm will always match but that the sum of all the previous arms match the whole domain, i.e. an arm is *subsumed* (§11.3) as with the switch statement (§13.8.3)?

Or is this not subsumption as it includes the guards?

Or does pattern subsumption (§11.3) need to be expanded to include guards?

Even if it is not subsumption I think it needs to be clear that it is the sum of *all* preceding arms.

Reviewer 4: Potentially relevant case (unless I'm mistaken):

```csharp
object x = 10;
bool b = false;

int y = x switch
{
    int i when !b => 0,
    int i when b => 1,
    int i => 2,
    _ => 3
};
```

This compiles with no errors or warnings.

Reviewer: @jskeet’s example shows that guards cannot in general be evaluated at compile time, so no coverage errors directly based on them. For the arms in the example, 1 & 2 match some subset of the pattern – but those subsets are not known in general at compile time, 3 matches anything 1 & 2 didn’t, and 4 matches everything that’s not `int`. So no arm is unreachable.

However if `x` was `int` then arm 4 is unreachable. Or alternatively if arms 2 & 3 are swapped the now 3rd arm with a guard is unreachable.

I think roughly:

- the definition cannot ignore guards (or else here arms 2 & 3 would be errors)
- a pattern with a guard cannot appear after the same pattern without a guard
- in general the order of arms with the same pattern but different guards cannot be checked to determine if any are unreachable.
- if a pattern occurs multiple times but only with guards then it must be assumed that coverage is not complete. E.g. after considering arms 1 & 2 (coverage is built up sequentially) we know all ints are covered, but arm 3 must be allowed as in general the full coverage of 1 & 2 cannot be ascertained at compile time.

I’ll leave trying to wordsmith that into a concise precise definition right now…

Reviewer 4: In meeting: if the guard is a constant expression with a value of true, that guard is effectively discarded, e.g.

```csharp
object x = 10;

int y = x switch
{
    int i when true => 1,
    int i => 2, // Invalid
    _ => 3
};
```

So maybe something like:

"because some previous pattern with no guard, or a pattern with a guard whose value is a constant expression with the value `true`, will always match"

Reviewer 4: Or introduce the "a pattern with a guard with a constant expression of value true is equivalent to a pattern without a guard" aspect when we introduce guards.

Reviewer 3: This should probably be restated in terms of subsumption. case expression arms with guards are only considered if the guard is a constant expression equal to true (if it's equal to false, it doesn't subsume).

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> A switch expression is said to be *exhaustive* if every value of its input is handled by at least one arm of the switch expression.  The compiler shall produce a warning if a switch expression is not exhaustive.

Reviewer 2: style question, do we need "said to be"?, or is this the definition?

```suggestion
A switch expression is *exhaustive* if every value of its input is handled by at least one arm of the switch expression.  The compiler shall produce a warning if a switch expression is not exhaustive.
```

Reviewer: An addition to @BillWagner’s change – remove the compiler, also add blank line at end to break para. (Includes Bill’s suggestion):

```suggestion
A switch expression is *exhaustive* if every value of its input is handled by at least one arm of the switch expression.  A warning shall be issued if a switch expression is not exhaustive.

```

Reviewer 4: Let's change "shall be" to "may be" which also gives us wiggle room around nullable types and exhaustiveness.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

> A switch expression is said to be *exhaustive* if every value of its input is handled by at least one arm of the switch expression.  The compiler shall produce a warning if a switch expression is not exhaustive.

Reviewer: Line 3910 requires an error if an arm is unreachable

Line 3912 requires a warning if the switch expression is not exhaustive

Was the first being a warning and the second an error the intention? Or both being an error?

A switch expression produces a value, to only warn that it might not and hence allow something unspecified to happen at runtime, seems possibly more consequential than unreachable arms.

Reviewer 4: Meeting determined: no change required.

> At runtime, the result of the *switch_expression* is the value of the *expression* of the first *switch_expression_arm* for which the expression on the left-hand-side of the *switch_expression* matches the *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern, and for which the *case_guard* of the *switch_expression_arm*, if present, evaluates to `true`. If there is no such *switch_expression_arm*, the *switch_expression* throws an instance of the exception `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.SwitchExpressionException`.

Reviewer 4: Note: this exception type is not yet in the annexes. We already have an issue for it: https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/issues/1021

> At runtime, the result of the *switch_expression* is the value of the *expression* of the first *switch_expression_arm* for which the expression on the left-hand-side of the *switch_expression* matches the *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern, and for which the *case_guard* of the *switch_expression_arm*, if present, evaluates to `true`. If there is no such *switch_expression_arm*, the *switch_expression* throws an instance of the exception `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.SwitchExpressionException`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At runtime, the result of the *switch_expression* is the value of the *expression* of the first *switch_expression_arm* for which the expression on the left-hand-side of the *switch_expression* matches the *switch_expression_arm*'s pattern, and for which the *case_guard* of the *switch_expression_arm*, if present, evaluates to `true`. If there is no such *switch_expression_arm*, the *switch_expression* throws an instance of the exception `System.Runtime.CompilerServices.SwitchExpressionException` if this exception type is accessible within the compilation at this point, or else the exception `System.InvalidOperationException`.
```

Reviewer 4: Let's make it "System.InvalidOperationException or a type derived from that". In that case we don't need the specific exception type in the annex either :) (But we do need InvalidOperationException.)

> > *Example*: The following converts values of an enum representing visual directions in an online map to the corresponding cardinal directions:

Reviewer: in -> on?

```suggestion
> *Example*: The following converts values of an enum representing visual directions on an online map to the corresponding cardinal directions:
```

(And why “online”, is the conversion different for physical maps? ;-))

Reviewer 3: For flavor.

```ANTLR
multiplicative_expression

>     : range_expression
>     | switch_expression
>     | multiplicative_expression '*' range_expression
>     | multiplicative_expression '/' range_expression
>     | multiplicative_expression '%' range_expression

Reviewer: To add this I had to delete @BillWagner’s comment:

> This needs more work (see other comments on grammar). I added this as a placeholder to remember it while addressing merge conflicts.

I believe the intended grammar is:

```suggestion
    : switch_expression
    | multiplicative_expression '*' switch_expression
    | multiplicative_expression '/' switch_expression
    | multiplicative_expression '%' switch_expression
```

```

> *Note*: Lookup for the right operand of the `is` operator must first test as a *type*, then as an *expression* which may span multiple tokens. In the case where the operand is an *expreesion*, the pattern expression must have precedence at least as high as *shift_expression*. *end note*
<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->

> > *Note*: There is a grammar ambiguity between *type* and *constant_pattern* in a `relational_expression` involved `is`; either might be a valid parse of a qualified identifier. In such a case, only if it fails to bind as a type (for compatibility with previous versions of the language), is it resolved to be the first thing found (which must be either a constant or a type). This ambiguity is only present on the right-hand side of such an expression.

Reviewer: The preceding note on line 4085 needs work and is covered under issue #935. This note also needs work (style, “first thing found”, etc.) and is related so maybe should be covered under #935 as well; i.e. remove it here and add a comment to #935.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> *Note*: There is a grammar ambiguity between *type* and *constant_pattern* in a `relational_expression` on the right-hand-side of `is`; either might be a valid parse of a qualified identifier. In such a case, only if it fails to bind as a type (for compatibility with previous versions of the language), is it resolved to be the first thing found (which must be either a constant or a type). This ambiguity is only present on the right-hand side of such an expression.
```

Reviewer 4: (Agree with involved => involving, but also that we need to tighten up the language.)

    ;
```

> > *Note*: Lookup for the right operand of the `is` operator must first test as a *type*, then as an *expression* which may span multiple tokens. In the case where the operand is an *expreesion*, the pattern expression must have precedence at least as high as *shift_expression*. *end note*

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> *Note*: Lookup for the right operand of the `is` operator must first test as a *type*, then as an *expression* which may span multiple tokens. In the case where the operand is an *expression*, the pattern expression must have precedence at least as high as *shift_expression*. *end note*
```

    ;
```

> > *Note*: Lookup for the right operand of the `is` operator must first test as a *type*, then as an *expression* which may span multiple tokens. In the case where the operand is an *expression*, the pattern expression must have precedence at least as high as *shift_expression*. *end note*  

Reviewer: The first sentence is a *requirement* and so not an informative note. Both options may span multiple tokens and isn’t something the Standard usually talks about outside of the lexical description. For an example (the style is used in multiple places) of a similar situation look at §12.20.1 which contains the normative statement:

> When recognising an *anonymous_function_body* if both the *null_conditional_invocation_expression* and *expression* alternatives are applicable then the former shall be chosen.

The second sentence seems a bit odd/awkward, might it confuse more than elucidate? We have parenthesised expressions to indicate how items should be grouped if required – and that is not often highlighted. Is there something unique or particularly unexpected here? If anything is to be said I think it is informative so should stay as a Note, unike the first sentence.

Reviewer 4: @gafter will enumerate the situations in normative text (which can replace that note).

Reviewer 3: I've done so in https://github.com/dotnet/csharpstandard/issues/1428 which still needs to be applied, either in this PR or separately.

> 

Reviewer 2: let's remove the extra blank line:

```suggestion
```

Reviewer: Overtaken by #1285

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD028 -->

<!-- markdownlint-enable MD028 -->

> > *Note*: There is a grammar ambiguity between *type* and *constant_pattern* in a `relational_expression` on the right-hand-side of `is`; either might be a valid parse of a qualified identifier. In such a case, only if it fails to bind as a type (for compatibility with previous versions of the language), is it resolved to be the first thing found (which must be either a constant or a type). This ambiguity is only present on the right-hand side of such an expression.

Reviewer: As above how the ambiguity should be resolved is normative so not a Note.

Maybe its been a long day but I’m struggling with “first thing found (which must be either a constant or a type)” – thing? not sure that a good word choice – must? is this "will” or “resolved to first constant or type found by lookup, if any” or something else?

Reviewer 4: If it fails to bind to a type, how can the "first thing found" by a type? I think I'm missing something - an example (not necessarily in the standard) might help me understand what we're talking about here. I agree with Nigel's dislike of "first thing found" but can't suggest anything better until I understand the intent in more detail.

Reviewer: @jskeet – Good point, I missed that one! I think this one needs to follow the common pattern used else where for ambiguity (“if both A & B are valid derivations, A will be chosen” type of thing), but currently is in the “to be wordsmithed” task pile.

Reviewer: Overtaken by #1285

- `E` does not designate a value or does not have a type.
- The pattern `P` is not applicable ([§11.2](patterns.md#112-pattern-forms)) to the type `T`.

> Every *identifier* of the pattern introduces a new local variable that is definitely assigned once the corresponding *relational_expression* tests `true`.

Reviewer: “…assigned *if* the…” maybe? "Once" sounds like it is a temporal thing waiting on the relational expression to become true.

Reviewer 3: The section on definite assignment is in `variables.md` and needs to be extended to cover the is-pattern operator.

- `E` does not designate a value or does not have a type.
- The pattern `P` is not applicable ([§11.2](patterns.md#112-pattern-forms)) to the type `T`.

> Every *identifier* of the pattern introduces a new local variable that is definitely assigned once the corresponding *relational_expression* tests `true`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every *identifier* of the pattern introduces a new local variable that is definitely assigned where the corresponding *relational_expression* tests `true`.
```

There are two forms of the `is` operator. One is the *is-type operator*, which has a type on the right-hand-side. The other is the *is-pattern operator*, which has a pattern on the right-hand-side.

> An expression of the form `E is _`, where the right-hand-side is the identifier `_` and designates a type, is an *is-type operator*. To reduce confusion with the discard pattern, an implementation shall issue a warning where this occurs.

Reviewer: I'm tempted to suggest that if someone has named a type “_” then the last thing they’re aiming for is to reduce confusion!

Seriously, should this be a requirement in the Standard, or just left to the sort of helpful informative message an implementation might choose to issue?

Reviewer 4: Agreed in meeting to delete.

#### 12.13.12.1 The is-type operator

The *is-type operator* is used to check if the run-time type of an object is compatible with a given type. The check is performed at runtime. The result of the operation `E is T`, where `E` is an expression and `T` is a type other than `dynamic`, is a Boolean value indicating whether `E` is non-null and can successfully be converted to type `T` by a reference conversion, a boxing conversion, an unboxing conversion, a wrapping conversion, or an unwrapping conversion.

The operation `E is T` is evaluated as follows:

1. If `E` is an anonymous function or method group, a compile-time error occurs.
1. If `T` is a nullable reference type ([§8.9.3](types.md#893-nullable-reference-types)), a compile-time error occurs.
1. If `E` is the `null` literal, or if the value of `E` is `null`, the result is `false`.
1. Otherwise:
  1. Let `R` be the runtime type of `E`.

>   1. Let `D` be derived from `R` as follows:

Reviewer 4: If we can figure out an alternative word to "derived" I think that would help. I assumed it was a derived type as in subclass etc to start with. (Would "inferred" still work? I think "derived" is the most precise word here - it just may not be the most helpful one...)

Reviewer: @jskeet – Following the pattern of line 259 would give:

> 1. Determine the type `D`. If `R` is a nullable value type, `D` is its underlying type; otherwise, `D is equal to `R`.

which removes derives and 2-sub bullets. There are other similar situations with wordings that are similar to this.

Reviewer: Added to #1432

>     1. If `R` is a nullable value type, `D` is the underlying type of `R`.
>     1. Otherwise, `D` is `R`.

Reviewer 2: Needs one more indent space:

```suggestion
     1. If `R` is a nullable value type, `D` is the underlying type of `R`.
     1. Otherwise, `D` is `R`.
```

Reviewer: I think it needs more than one as the preceding and following lines are also being barfed at, isn’t MD “fun”!

Is this the intended structure?

---
The operation `E is T` is evaluated as follows:

1. If `E` is an anonymous function or method group, a compile-time error occurs.
1. If `T` is a nullable reference type ([§8.9.3](types.md#893-nullable-reference-types)), a compile-time error occurs.
1. If `E` is the `null` literal, or if the value of `E` is `null`, the result is `false`.
1. Otherwise:
   1. Let `R` be the runtime type of `E`.
   1. Let `D` be derived from `R` as follows:
      1. If `R` is a nullable value type, `D` is the underlying type of `R`.
      1. Otherwise, `D` is `R`.
   1. The result depends on `D` and `T` as follows:
      1. If `T` is a reference type, the result is `true` if:
         - an identity conversion exists between `D` and `T`, or
         - `D` is a reference type and an implicit reference conversion from `D` to `T` exists, or
         - `D` is a value type and a boxing conversion from `D` to `T` exists.
      1. If `T` is a nullable value type, the result is `true` if `D` is the underlying type of `T`.
      1. If `T` is a non-nullable value type, the result is `true` if `D` and `T` are the same type.
      1. Otherwise, the result is `false`.

User defined conversions are not considered by the `is` operator.

---

(Not a change suggestion as we’ve overlapping comments and that confuses poor github.)

Reviewer 3: Yes

  1. The result depends on `D` and `T` as follows:

>     1. If `T` is a reference type, the result is `true` if:
>       - an identity conversion exists between `D` and `T`, or
>       - `D` is a reference type and an implicit reference conversion from `D` to `T` exists, or
>       - `D` is a value type and a boxing conversion from `D` to `T` exists.
>     1. If `T` is a nullable value type, the result is `true` if `D` is the underlying type of `T`.
>     1. If `T` is a non-nullable value type, the result is `true` if `D` and `T` are the same type.
>     1. Otherwise, the result is `false`.

Reviewer 2: similar:

```suggestion
     1. If `T` is a reference type, the result is `true` if:
         - an identity conversion exists between `D` and `T`, or
         - `D` is a reference type and an implicit reference conversion from `D` to `T` exists, or
         - `D` is a value type and a boxing conversion from `D` to `T` exists.
     1. If `T` is a nullable value type, the result is `true` if `D` is the underlying type of `T`.
     1. If `T` is a non-nullable value type, the result is `true` if `D` and `T` are the same type.
     1. Otherwise, the result is `false`.
```

- `E` does not designate a value or does not have a type.
- The pattern `P` is not applicable ([§11.2](patterns.md#112-pattern-forms)) to the type `T`.

> Every *single_variable_designation* of the pattern introduces a new local variable that is *definitely assigned* ([§9.4](variables.md#94-definite-assignment)) when the corresponding *relational_expression* tests `true`.

Reviewer: Is text required somewhere in §9.4 for it to remain complete?

Reviewer 3: xref to

#### 9.4.4.34 is-pattern expressions

Reviewer: Added to #1432
